---
title: Formal Languages and Automata Theory [2]
excerpt: ''
date: 2024-10-21 21:22:06
---

# Grammars

> A grammar should include terminals and non-terminals along with a set of rules which attribute some information regarding the non-terminals symbols.

$$
\mathcal{G} = (N, \Sigma, P, S)
$$

- $N$: a finite set of nonterminals
- $\Sigma$: a finite set of terminals
- $S$: the start symbol. $S \in N$
- $P$: a finite set of production rules. $P \subset N \times V^*$, where $V = N \cup \Sigma$

For the production rule $(A, \alpha) \in P$, write $A \rightarrow \alpha$

- For grammar $\mathcal{G} = (N, \Sigma, P, S)$ with $V = N \cup \Sigma$, define a binary relation $\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}$ on $V^*$

  - $\forall \alpha,\beta \in V^*$, we have: $\alpha \underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow} \beta \Longleftrightarrow \alpha = \alpha_1 A \alpha_2, \beta=\alpha_1 \gamma \alpha_2, A \rightarrow \gamma \in P$

  - $\alpha \underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow} \beta$ called $\alpha$ ***yields*** $\beta$ in one step in $\mathcal{G}$

  - If after limited operations with $\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}$, $\alpha$ yields $\beta$, write $\alpha \overset{ * }{\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}} \beta$. The times of the operations is $n$, and it is written as $\alpha \overset{n}{\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}} \beta$

  - $\alpha \overset{ * }{\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}} \beta$ called $\alpha$ ***derives*** $\beta$ in $\mathcal{G}$

  - If $S \overset{ * }{\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}} \alpha$, then the string $\alpha \in V^*$ is called a **sentential form** in $\mathcal{G}$

  - The language generated by $\mathcal{G}$ is denoted by $L(\mathcal{G})$

$$
L(G) = \set{ x \in \Sigma^* | S \overset{ * }{\underset{\mathcal{G}}{\Rightarrow}} x}
$$

## CFG: Context Free Grammar

A context free grammar or simply a CFG is a grammar in which $A$ is a nonterminal in every production rule $A \rightarrow \alpha$.

## Derivations

- **Leftmost derivation**: the production rule applied at each step is on the leftmost nonterminal symbol of the sentential form. It is denoted by $A \overset{*}{\Rightarrow}_L x$
- **Rightmost derivation**: the production rule applied at each step is on the rightmost nonterminal symbol of the sentential form. It is denoted by $A \overset{*}{\Rightarrow}_R x$

$$
A \overset{*}{\Rightarrow} x \Longleftrightarrow A \overset{*}{\Rightarrow}_L x
$$

- ***Two equivalent leftmost derivations are identical***

## Ambiguity and Regular Grammars

- A CFG might give several inquivalent derivations for a string(two or more leftmost or rightmost derivations). This leads to an ambiguity in parsing.
- A grammar with this property is ***ambiguous***.

> A CFG $\mathcal{G}$ is said to be ***linear*** if every production rule of $\mathcal{G}$ has at most one nonterminal symbol in its righthand side.

- If a CFG is linear, every derivation in it is a leftmost derivation as well as a rightmost derivation

Right linear derivations:

$$
A \rightarrow x \quad or \quad A \rightarrow xB
$$

Leftmost linear derivations:

$$
A \rightarrow x \quad or \quad A \rightarrow Bx
$$

> The language generated by a right linear grammar is regular.

- For every regular language $L$, there exists a right linear grammar that generates $L$
